## Description of the Summarized Human Activity Data Set

### Files included

The project results are presented in five files:  
1. This *README.md*
2. *CodeBook.md*: the code book, i.e. the document describing the built dataset
3. *run_analysis.R*: the R script used to generate the result
4. *summary_dataset.txt*: result (summarized) dataset
5. *merged_dataset.csv*: the data before summarizing


### Source Data

This project is based on the data from work [1].

### How the results were obtained

In the present project the features and labels of the training and testing datasets
from [1] were merged. Only the features describing mean and standard deviation values
were taken. As the last step, the selected features' average values were computed
grouped by *activity* (LAYING, SITTING, STANDING, WALKING, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, WALKING_UPSTAIRS) 
and *subject id* (identifies the volunteer, 1 to 30).


The final result file *summary_dataset.csv* (along with intermediate *merged_dataset.csv*)
is generated by the R script *run_analysis.R*. Here we explain the procedure carried out by the script.


1. The *data/* directory is created, the data files are downloaded from the internet
and unpacked into the *data/* directory.
2. Train features and labels are loaded.
3. Test features and labels are loaded.
4. Feature strings (variable names) are loaded, cleaned up in order to be used as column names in R.
5. Only the feature strings containing "mean(" or "std(" are selected.
6. *bigDataSet* is built as a union of the train and test feature data frames
(taking only the columns corresponding to the features from (5)).
7. Subject ids for each measurement in the train and test data are loaded and merged.
They are added as an extra column to *bigDataSet*.
8. Activity labels (as strings) are loaded. They are used to include the labels as 
a descriptive factor variable to *bigDataSet*.
9. *bigDataSet* is stored in the *merged_dataset.csv* file.
10. *bigDataSet* is grouped by the pair (activity label, subject id) and the average
of every feature variable is computed based on this grouping. The result is stored
in *summaryDataSet*, which is written to *summary_dataset.txt*.

Ivan Lysiuchenko, May 2018

__References__

[1] Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. 
Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. 
International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012  
[http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones)
